complex-numbers concept docs (#3554)
exercism/python: concepts/complex-numbers/about.md

# About

`Complex numbers` are not complicated.
They just need a less alarming name.

They are so useful, especially in engineering and science, that Python includes [`complex`][complex] as a standard type alongside integers and floating-point numbers.

## Basics

> A `complex` value in Python is essentially a pair of floating-point numbers.

Author: I added something at the end of the introduction. See what you think (it's in b674997274d49cb4c5e2eb28f8bcccca6139b85c, the commit where I move stuff around).

> A `complex` value in Python is essentially a pair of floating-point numbers.

Reviewer: I like that!  I'm going to mark this as resolved.  😄

These are called the "real" and "imaginary" parts, for unfortunate historical reasons.
Again, it is best to focus on the underlying simplicity and not the strange names.

There are two common ways to create them.

> The `complex(real, imag)` constructor takes two `float` parameters:

Author: I like adding the reference, but I'll fix the typo in [comple]

I missed the bit about constructing with a string, I'll go away and read up on that.

> The `complex(real, imag)` constructor takes two `float` parameters:

Author: I committed fixes for several links including this one.

> The `complex(real, imag)` constructor takes two `float` parameters:

Reviewer: 🤦🏽‍♀️   for the typo.  I always tell people that English is my "native" language, but you can't really tell that from my spelling....  🙄 😆 .

> The `complex(real, imag)` constructor takes two `float` parameters:

Author: I find that my head can spell but my fingers can't. This is getting worse with age.

Though for a US/UK dual citizen like me, there can be more than one "correct" spelling....

> The `complex(real, imag)` constructor takes two `float` parameters:

Author: Added the `complex(string)` constructor in 02867e1d1ffcf95112f5076e4b73121db0fe4d1c

```python
>>> z1 = complex(1.5, 2.0)
>>> z1
(1.5+2j)
```

> 

Author: I'll go away and think about this

> 

Author: I tried to address this as part of b674997274d49cb4c5e2eb28f8bcccca6139b85c.

That changes the document quite a bit, so I'll be particularly interested in your comments.

Most engineers are happy with `j`.
Most scientists and mathematicians prefer `i`, but in designing Python the engineers won.

So there are two rules for an imaginary part:
- It is designated with `j` not `i`.

> - The `j` must immediately follow a number, to prevent Python seeing it as a variable name. If necessary, use `1j`.

Author: Agree

> - The `j` must immediately follow a number, to prevent Python seeing it as a variable name. If necessary, use `1j`.

Author: I added this towards the end of the introduction.

```python
>>> j
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
NameError: name 'j' is not defined

>>> 1j
1j

>>> type(1j)
<class 'complex'>
```

With this, we have a second and perhaps clearer way to create a complex number:
```python
>>> z2 = 2.0 + 1.5j
>>> z2
(2+1.5j)
```
The end result is identical to using a constructor.

> To access the parts individually:

Author: Another part of b674997274d49cb4c5e2eb28f8bcccca6139b85c.

```python
>>> z2.real
2.0
>>> z2.imag
1.5
```

## Arithmetic

Most of the [`operators`][operators] used with floats also work with complex

```python
>>> z1, z2
((1.5+2j), (2+1.5j))

>>> z1 + z2  # addition
(3.5+3.5j)

>>> z1 - z2  # subtraction
(-0.5+0.5j)

>>> z1 * z2  # multiplication
6.25j

>>> z1 / z2  # division
(0.96+0.28j)

>>> z1 ** 2  # exponentiation
(-1.75+6j)

>>> 2 ** z1  # another exponentiation
(0.5188946835878313+2.7804223253571183j)

> >>> 1j ** 2 # j is the square root of -1

Author: This is something I worried about after I submitted the PR, so _something_ needs changing. More thought...

> >>> 1j ** 2 # j is the square root of -1

Author: Take a look at the intro now and see what you think of the changes.

2.5
```

## The `cmath` module

The Python standard library has a `math` module full of useful functionality for working with real numbers.
It also has an equivalent `cmath` module for complex numbers.

Details are available in the [`cmath`][cmath] module documents, but the main categories are:
- conversion between Cartesian and polar coordinates
- exponential and log functions
- trig functions
- hyperbolic functions
- classification functions
- useful constants

```python
>>> import cmath

>>> euler = cmath.exp(1j * cmath.pi) # Euler's equation

>>> euler.real
-1.0
>>> round(euler.imag, 15) # round to 15 decimal places
0.0
```

So a simple expression with three of the most important constants in nature `e`, `i` (or `j`) and `pi` gives the result `-1`. 
Some people believe this is the most beautiful result in all of mathematics.
It dates back to around 1740.

-----

## Optional section: a Complex Numbers FAQ

This part can be skipped, unless you are interested.

### Isn't this some strange new piece of pure mathematics?

It was strange and new in the 16th century.

500 years later, it is central to most of engineering and the physical sciences.

### Why would anyone use these?

> It turns out that complex numbers are the simplest way to describe anything that rotates or anything with a wave-like property.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It turns out that complex numbers are the simplest way to describe anything that rotates or anything with a wave-like property.
So they are used widely in electrical engineering, audio processing, physics, computer gaming, and navigation - to name only a few applications.
```

You can see things rotate.

> Complex numbers may not make the world go round, but they are great for explaining what happens as a result of the world going round: look at any satellite image of a major storm.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Complex numbers may not make the world go round, but they are great for explaining _what happens_ as a result of the world going round: look at any satellite image of a major storm.

```

> Less obviously, sound is wave-like, light is wave-like, radio signals are wave-like, The economy of your home country is at least partly wave-like.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Less obviously, sound is wave-like, light is wave-like, radio signals are wave-like, and even the economy of your home country is at least partly wave-like.

```

> A lot of this can be done with trig functions (`sin()` and `cos()`) but that gets messy quickly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A lot of this wave processing can be done with trig functions (`sin()` and `cos()`) but that gets messy quite quickly.

```

> Complex exponentials are ___much___ easier to work with.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Complex exponentials are ___much___ easier to work with, and moving these waves to a representation on the complex number plane simplifies calculations.

```

Author: We didn't mention the complex plane before, and I had already wondered if we should. I resisted the temptation to include a graphic showing the complex plane and unit circle, and magnitude vs phase. Maybe a Wikipedia link?

Too much of this and we'll be discussing the Cauchy-Riemann equations and having to explain partial differential equations...

Author: I'm still not sure what to do about this.

Reviewer: Me either.  All of the examples I've found have shown the unit circle and how things translate (rotate) when put on the complex plane.  [this rundown](https://realpython.com/python-complex-numbers/) from Real Python uses a (contrived) example of the Bermuda Triangle.  Very tempted to adapt it with a different region of the globe.  Or maybe we use a simple geometric form and how it can be flipped and rotated easier on the complex plane.  URG.  More thought needed on my part, clearly.

> ### But I never use complex numbers!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### But I don't need complex numbers!

```

Only true if you are living in a cave and foraging for your food.

> If you read this on any sort of screen, you are utterly dependent on some useful 20th-centry advances.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are reading this on any sort of screen, you are utterly dependent on some useful 20th-Century advances made through the use of complex numbers.

```

1. __Semiconductor chips__. 
    - These make no sense in classical physics and can only be explained (and designed) by quantum mechanics (QM).

>     - In QM, everything is complex-valued by definition.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - In QM, everything is complex-valued by definition. (_its waveforms all the way down_)

```

Author: No real solutions for $\Psi$ in the Schrodinger equation...

2. __The Fast Fourier Transform algorithm__. 
    - FFT is an application of complex numbers, and it is in everything.

>     - Audio files? MP3 and other formats use FFT for compression. So does MP4 video, JPEG photos, among many others.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    -MP3 and other audio formats use FFT for compression, ensuring more audio can fit within a smaller storage space. 
    - JPEG compression and MP4 video, among many other image and video formats also use FTT for compression.

```

# About

`Complex numbers` are not complicated.
They just need a less alarming name.

They are so useful, especially in engineering and science, that Python includes [`complex`][complex] as a standard numeric type alongside integers ([`int`s][ints]) and floating-point numbers ([`float`s][floats]).

## Basics

A `complex` value in Python is essentially a pair of floating-point numbers.
These are called the "real" and "imaginary" parts, for unfortunate historical reasons.
Again, it is best to focus on the underlying simplicity and not the strange names.

There are two common ways to create complex numbers.

1) The [`complex(real, imag)`][complex] constructor takes two `float` parameters:

```python
>>> z1 = complex(1.5, 2.0)
>>> z1
(1.5+2j)
```

The constructor can also parse string input.
This has the odd limitation that it fails if the string contains spaces.

```python
>>> complex('4+2j')
(4+2j)

>>> complex('4 + 2j')
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
ValueError: complex() arg is a malformed string
```

> 2) The complex number can be specified as `<real part> + <complex part>j`, or just `<complex part>j` if the real part is zero:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2) The complex number can be specified as `<real part> + <complex part>j` literal, or just `<complex part>j` if the real part is zero:

```

```python
>>> z2 = 2.0 + 1.5j
>>> z2
(2+1.5j)
```

> The end result is identical to using a constructor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The end result is identical to using the `complex()` constructor.

```

> There are two rules for an imaginary part in Python:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two rules for that imaginary part of the complex number:

```

> - It is designated with `j` (not `i` as you may see in textbooks).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It is designated with `j` (not `i` as you may see in math textbooks).

```

Author: and physics, but let's go with your shorter form

- The `j` must immediately follow a number, to prevent Python seeing it as a variable name. If necessary, use `1j`.

```python
>>> j
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
NameError: name 'j' is not defined

>>> 1j
1j

>>> type(1j)
<class 'complex'>
```

Most engineers are happy with `j`.

> Most scientists and mathematicians prefer the mathematical notation `i`, but in designing Python the engineers won.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most scientists and mathematicians prefer the mathematical notation `i` for _imaginary_, but that notation conflicts with the use of `i` to mean _current_ in Electrical Engineering.
So in designing Python, the Electrical Engineers won.

```

> To access the parts individually:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To access the parts of a complex number individually:

```

```python
>>> z2.real
2.0
>>> z2.imag
1.5
```

Either part can be zero and mathematicians may then talk of the number being "wholly real" or "wholly imaginary".

> However, it is still a complex number in Python.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, it is still a complex number in Python:

```
